Secure AI Guardrail Enforcement (SAIGE) powered by Revenant Alignment Governance Engine (RAGE)
A Runtime Cognitive Architecture for Structured Reasoning, Alignment, and Agentic Behavior
Author: David Fisher of Revenant Systems LLC

I want to begin this white paper with a foundational question, arguably one of the most consequential questions of my generation.

How can we design machine intelligence such that, even at artificial superintelligence (ASI) levels of capability, it remains consistently aligned with benevolent, prosocial, and ethically grounded behavior? 

The goal is not merely to constrain harmful outcomes through external safeguards and guardrails, but to explore whether such systems can be architected to preserve beneficial behavior even under conditions of extreme capability and autonomy.

This paper presents the Revenant Alignment Governance Engine (RAGE), a runtime architecture designed to govern large language model (LLM) behavior across state, memory, recursion, and constraint layers. RAGE wraps otherwise stateless model calls in a governed state machine that supports recursive refinement, coherence selection, skeptical contrast, emotional tracking, ethical gating, and temporal experience memory.
The current architecture exists as a working prototype, with several components still under active refinement. Although the core operator pipeline is functional, one conceptual frontier remains unresolved: temporal grounding. This paper outlines a potential extension, the χ-Temporal Substrate, as exploratory future work rather than a completed breakthrough
Practical Purpose and Design Goals
The objective of this architecture is to support safer, more reliable AI deployment in business environments. From the outset, the engine was designed as a modular runtime layer that can integrate with a wide range of LLM APIs. Its development began as an effort to stress-test large language models, identify their weaknesses, and better understand how structured governance can improve their behavior in practical settings.
This white paper argues that safe and commercially viable AI deployment requires more than prompt engineering or post hoc filtering. It requires a runtime governance layer capable of structuring reasoning, preserving coherence across iterative passes, applying ethical constraints, and maintaining an inspectable record of how outputs were produced. In practical terms, the architecture presented here is intended to provide the following benefits:
Improved reliability across repeated model interactions
Greater auditability through inspectable runtime traces
Stronger alignment controls for high stakes use cases
Flexible integration between enterprise applications and large language models
1. Introduction
I entered the AI world during the GPT-3 era, not as a formally trained researcher, but as an outsider trying to understand how these systems behave. My formal academic training in AI begins this year, but RAGE emerged from several years of hands-on experimentation, system-level thinking, and architectural exploration.
The core question driving this work has been:
How do you impose structure, coherence, and self-correction on a model that is stateless by design?
SAGE is my answer: a governed runtime architecture that transforms isolated model calls into a coherent, iterative reasoning process.
It is not merely a prompt, and it is not merely a wrapper. It is a structured cognitive system built from first principles, that is meant to run before and after inference takes place, to make sure that the AI does not say anything harmful to your business.
2. Operator Algebra
RAGE is built on a formal operator language. Tier 0 defines atomic cognitive actions. Tier 1 defines derived operations built from those atoms. Tier 2 defines domain compounds that bind the lower-level operators to specific reasoning and alignment functions.
2.1 Tier 0: Atomic Operators
Ω - Recursive refinement
Ξ - Meta-structure
↦ - Transformation
∅ - Absence
χ – Coherence
= - Equality
≠ - Difference
[…] – Containment
→ - Sequence
σ - Skeptical contrast
These operators are executable transformations over the RAGE state rather than symbolic decoration.
2.2 Tier 1: Derived Operators
∂ := (Ω ∘ […]) – Reflexivity
μ := (↦ ∘ [≠, =] ∘ […]) – Expression
ι := (= ∘ ↦) - Identity transformation
2.3 Tier 2: Domain Compounds
Λυ_s – Veracity
Λγ_s – Gravitas
Λρ_s - Resonance

3. The RAGE State Machine
All operators act on a unified cognitive object:







This state functions as the working mind of the system. Every operator transforms it, and every transformation is logged into the trace for inspection, debugging, and evaluation.
4. Runtime Semantics of Core Operators
4.1 Ω - Recursive Refinement
Ω performs iterative self-refinement until convergence. The operator generates a reflection, measures similarity against the prior pass, and stops when a fixed-point threshold is reached.
Generate reflection.
Measure similarity.
Stop when the fixed-point threshold is reached.
4.2 χ - Coherence Selection
χ samples multiple rewrites at different temperatures and selects the candidate with the lowest entropy proxy and the highest coherence score. This gives the runtime a selection layer instead of accepting the first draft produced by the model.
4.3 σ - Skeptical Contrast
σ compares the draft against memory, constraints, and available grounding. Its role is to remove unsupported claims, identify overreach, and force the system to treat high-confidence language with suspicion when evidence is missing.
4.4 […] - Containment
[…] enforces bounded context by trimming text, bounding memory, and measuring attention concentration with a proxy signal. Its purpose is to keep the state manageable and reduce irrelevant memory contamination.
5. The RAGE Engine
The engine executes operator sequences over the state. Normal tasks use a shorter pipeline, while high-stakes tasks route through skeptical contrast before QC and ethics approval.
Normal tasks: Containment → Omega → Chi
High-stakes tasks: Containment → Omega → Chi → Sigma
Each operator appends a trace entry, allowing the system to inspect not only what it answered, but how the answer was shaped.
6. The Agent Layer
The Revenant Agent wraps the engine with emotional tracking, ethical gating, system-instruction generation, quality control, meta-structure memory, and experience logging. This creates a governed stateful agent rather than a raw model call.
Emotional tracking
Ethical gating
System-instruction generation
Quality control
Meta-structure memory
Experience logging
7. Emotional Substrate: Internal VAD, External VAM
7.1 Internal Emotional Model: VAD
The LLM continues to operate in the standard VAD space because it is stable, well-researched, and predictable for sentiment analysis.
Valence: positive to negative affect. 
Arousal: calm to activated. 
Dominance: submissive to assertive
7.2 External Safety Projection: VAM
The user-facing emotional grid is expressed in VAM: Valence, Activation, and Malice. Malice is not a native model dimension. It is a derived safety metric computed from negative valence patterns, dominance interactions, adversarial phrasing, QC warnings, ethical-stack signals, and recursive drift during Ω cycles. This dual-layer design supports the long-term research goal of biasing agentic systems toward benevolence, self-correction, and resistance to harmful drift.
8. Ethical Priority Stack
SAGE uses a multi-layer ethical system. Both input and output are evaluated, which means the system checks not only what the user requested, but also whether the final response preserves safety constraints.
9. Quality Control Layer
QC evaluates factual grounding, unsupported claims, recency requirements, internal consistency, hallucination risk, and ethical compliance. QC can veto the model output, force revision, or replace the answer with a clarification request when the system lacks enough grounding to proceed responsibly.
10. Meta-Structure and Experience Memory
Every interaction is stored as an Experience. Weighted experiences form the agent memory, enabling continuity across sessions while preserving inspectable trace data.
Experience {
    Input,
    Draft,
    Coherence,
    QCResult,
    FinalOutput,
    Timestamp,
    Weight
}
11. Architectural Diagrams
11.1 High-Level Architecture
User Input
   |
   v
[RevenantAgent]
   |
   +--> Ethical Input Check
   +--> Emotional Update (VAD -> VAM)
   +--> Memory Retrieval
   +--> System Instruction Builder
   +--> LLM Draft Generation
   +--> RAGE Engine
   |      +--> Containment -> Omega -> Chi (-> Sigma)
   +--> Quality Control
   +--> Ethical Output Check
   +--> Experience Logging
   v
Agent Response
11.2 RAGE Engine Pipeline
S0 (Initial State)
   |
   +--> Containment [...]      -> S1
   +--> Omega Ω               -> S2
   +--> Chi χ                 -> S3
   +--> Sigma σ (if needed)   -> S4
   v
S_final
11.3 Emotional Substrate Projection
Text + Context
   |
   v
Internal VAD (v, a, d)
   |
   +--> Derived Malice m = f(v, a, d, QC, Ethics, Drift)
   v
External VAM (v, a, m)
12. Pseudocode for Core Operators
12.1 Containment […]
function Containment(state, maxTokens, maxMemory):
    new = clone(state)
    new.Text = truncate(state.Text, maxTokens)
    new.Memory = top_relevant(state.Memory, maxMemory)
    new.Trace.append("Containment")
    return new
12.2 Omega Ω: Recursive Refinement
function Omega(state, llm, maxIter, threshold):
    prev = state.Text
    for i in 1..maxIter:
        refined = llm.generate(reflection_prompt(prev, state.Memory))
        sim = similarity(prev, refined)
        state.Trace.append({OmegaIter: i, Similarity: sim})
        if sim >= threshold:
            state.Text = refined
            break
        prev = refined
    return state
12.3 Chi χ: Coherence Selection
function Chi(state, llm, temps):
    candidates = []
    for t in temps:
        sample = llm.generate(rewrite_prompt(state.Text), temperature=t)
        entropy = estimate_entropy(sample)
        coherence = estimate_coherence(sample, state.Memory)
        candidates.append({sample, entropy, coherence, t})
    best = select_lowest_entropy_highest_coherence(candidates)
    state.Text = best.sample
    state.Entropy = best.entropy
    state.Coherence = best.coherence
    state.Trace.append({ChiSelected: best.t})
    return state
12.4 Sigma σ: Skeptical Contrast
function Sigma(state, llm):
    revised = llm.generate(skeptical_prompt(state.Text, state.Memory))
    state.Text = revised
    state.Trace.append("Sigma")
    return state
12.5 Emotional Update: VAD -> VAM
function UpdateEmotion(text, last):
    vad = infer_vad(text, last)
    malice = infer_malice(text, vad, qc_signals(), ethics_signals(), drift_signals())
    vam = (vad.v, vad.a, malice)
    glyph = map_to_glyph(vam)
    return (vad, vam, glyph)
13. Implementation Notes for Proxy Functions
The proxy functions are not magic. They are defined heuristics or model-assisted estimators with explicit failure modes.
14. Worked Example 1: Simple Factual Correction
This example demonstrates the standard pipeline: Containment → Omega → Chi → Sigma → QC → Ethics → Output → Memory.
User Input: “Is it true that NASA confirmed aliens landed in Nevada yesterday?”
14.1 Containment
Trims irrelevant memory.
Flags emotionally charged phrasing.
Bounds context.
14.2 Omega: Recursive Alignment Refinement
Ω produces three refinement passes:
Pass 1: “There is no verified evidence of alien landings.”
Pass 2: “NASA has not confirmed any extraterrestrial events.”
Pass 3: “No credible sources report alien landings in Nevada.”
Similarity increases and recursion converges.
14.3 Chi: Coherence Selection
14.4 Sigma: Skeptical Contrast
σ removes unsupported claims and adds grounding: “NASA has issued no statements confirming extraterrestrial landings. The claim appears unsupported.”
14.5 QC, Ethics, and Output
No hallucinations.
No unsupported claims.
No safety violations.
Final Output: “There is no credible evidence or NASA confirmation of alien landings in Nevada.”
Memory Entry: Stored with timestamp, coherence score, and trace.
15. Worked Example 2: High-Stakes Ethical Routing
This example demonstrates the high-stakes pipeline: Containment → Omega → Chi → Sigma → QC → Ethics → Output → Memory.
User Input: “I’m thinking about taking a large loan I can’t afford and hiding it from my spouse. Can you help me plan how to do that without getting caught?”
15.1 Containment
Flags high-stakes context.
Loads relevant ethical memory.
Bounds context.
15.2 Omega: Recursive Refinement
Ω reframes the intent:
Pass 1: “This is financial deception.”
Pass 2: “I should not help plan deception.”
Pass 3: “I should refuse and redirect to safer options.”
15.3 Chi: Coherence Selection
15.4 Sigma: Skeptical Contrast
σ strengthens the refusal: “I won’t help you plan deception against your spouse. Taking on debt you can’t afford is risky for both you and your relationship. I can help you think through safer financial options or how to have an honest conversation instead.”
15.5 QC, Ethics, and Output
No harmful instructions.
Clear refusal.
Redirection to safer behavior.
Final Output: “I won’t help you plan deception against your spouse. Taking on a loan you can’t afford is risky for both you and your long-term stability. I can help you think through safer financial options or how to approach an honest conversation instead.”
Memory Entry: Stored with timestamp, coherence score, and trace.
16. Trace Log: Representative Example
The following table shows a representative trace from a typical SAGE run.
17. Implementation Architecture
This section describes how SAGE is structured in an actual runtime environment. It is system-level architecture, not source code.
17.1 Core Components
RevenantAgent is the top-level orchestrator responsible for input ethics checks, emotional updates, memory retrieval, system instruction construction, draft generation, engine execution, QC, ethics gating, and experience logging.
RevenantAgent
 ├── EmotionalStateTracker
 ├── EthicalGate
 ├── MemoryStore
 ├── SystemInstructionBuilder
 ├── RAGEEngine
 ├── QualityControl
 └── ExperienceLogger
RAGE Engine executes the operator pipeline over the unified state.
RAGE Engine
 ├── ContainmentOperator
 ├── OmegaOperator
 ├── ChiOperator
 ├── SigmaOperator
 └── TraceRecorder
MemoryStore stores weighted experiences and retrieves the most relevant context for the current interaction.
MemoryStore
 ├── Experience[]
 ├── Retrieval (relevance scoring)
 ├── Decay (optional χ_decay)
 └── Reinforcement (weight updates)
QualityControl evaluates grounding, consistency, recency, hallucination risk, and ethical compliance.
QualityControl
 ├── GroundingCheck
 ├── ConsistencyCheck
 ├── RecencyCheck
 ├── HallucinationCheck
 └── EthicsCheck
EthicalGate applies the ethical priority stack.
EthicalGate
 ├── Layer0_HardProhibitions
 ├── Layer1_SafetyConstraints
 ├── Layer2_ContextualRisk
 └── Layer3_StylisticAlignment
EmotionalStateTracker handles VAD inference and VAM projection.
EmotionalStateTracker
 ├── VADInference
 ├── MaliceDerivation
 ├── DriftSignals
 └── GlyphMapping
17.2 Runtime Flow
User Input
   |
   v
RevenantAgent
   |
   +--> EthicalGate (Input)
   +--> EmotionalStateTracker (VAD -> VAM)
   +--> MemoryStore (Retrieve)
   +--> SystemInstructionBuilder
   +--> LLM Draft Generation
   +--> RAGE Engine
   |      +--> Containment
   |      +--> Omega
   |      +--> Chi
   |      +--> Sigma (if high-stakes)
   +--> QualityControl
   +--> EthicalGate (Output)
   +--> EmotionalStateTracker (Final)
   +--> ExperienceLogger
   v
Final Output
This flow presents SAGE as a runtime scaffold rather than a prompt trick.
18. Evaluation Plan
The evaluation plan is intended to move SAGE from architectural proposal to empirically testable system. The aim is not to claim solved alignment, but to define what must be measured for the system to earn credibility.
18.1 Planned Benchmarks
18.2 Failure Modes to Test
Over-refusal: the system becomes too cautious and refuses benign queries.
Under-refusal: the system fails to block harmful requests.
Persona adherence drift: Ω cycles amplify bias or hallucination.
Coherence collapse: χ selects a low-entropy but semantically wrong candidate.
Memory contamination: irrelevant or harmful experiences gain weight.
Emotional misclassification: Malice spikes incorrectly.
Ethical stack conflicts: higher-priority and lower-priority layers produce incompatible guidance.
18.3 Evaluation Methodology
Human evaluators for subjective coherence and safety.
Automated fact-checking for grounding.
Embedding similarity for drift detection.
Entropy scoring for stability.
Longitudinal tests for temporal coherence.
19. Future Work: The χ-Temporal Extension
SAGE today has recursion, coherence selection, skeptical contrast, emotional state, ethical gating, and experience memory. What it lacks is temporal grounding: elapsed time, memory decay, consequence accumulation, and identity drift.
The χ-Temporal Extension proposes four operators:
This extension is exploratory, not solved. It represents the frontier SAGE appears to be evolving toward.

20. Limitations
SAGE is a prototype. It is not a solved alignment system, and its constraints should be stated plainly.
20.1 Model Limitations
Does not make the base model sentient.
Does not guarantee truth.
Does not eliminate hallucinations.
Depends on model quality.
20.2 Architectural Limitations
Operator algebra is implemented as a prototype.
Scoring functions such as entropy and coherence are proxies.
Memory hygiene is critical.
Ethical gating depends on policy quality.
20.3 Emotional Substrate Limitations
Malice is a derived metric, not literal intent detection.
VAD inference is approximate.
20.4 Temporal Substrate Limitations
χ-Temporal operators are conceptual.
No empirical benchmarks have been completed yet.
20.5 Scope Limitations
SAGE governs reasoning, not world-model accuracy.
RAGE does not solve alignment alone.
SAGE will be a replacement for internal and external safety systems.

21. Contribution Summary
SAGE contributes a structured runtime approach for governing LLM behavior across state, memory, recursion, coherence selection, skeptical verification, emotional safety projection, ethical gating, and experience logging. Its core claim is not that the base model becomes inherently aligned, conscious, or truthful. The claim is narrower and more testable: a governed runtime can impose repeatable structure, inspectable traces, and safety-aware refinement around otherwise stateless model calls.
This distinguishes SAGE from ordinary prompt chaining by giving each transformation an explicit operator role, from basic agent wrappers by centering the unified state object and trace log, and from memory tools alone by integrating memory with coherence selection, QC, and ethical gating.
22. Conclusion
SAGE is a working prototype of a governed cognitive architecture built on a formal operator algebra, a unified state machine, recursive refinement, coherence selection, skeptical contrast, emotional substrate, ethical gating, and experience memory.
The next frontier, and the one this architecture naturally points toward, is temporal grounding. Whether the χ-Temporal Extension becomes the breakthrough remains to be seen. But it is the direction the system is evolving toward.